docs/fix-department-response-to-dean.md, before:

# Fix Department Response to Dean Clarification

## Issue Clarification
When Dean sends requests for clarification to departments (HR, MMA, Audit, IT), after the department responds, it should be sent back to the Dean, not to the Chief Director.

## Investigation Results
The workflow logic was already correct in both the approval engine and API route. The issue was only in the UI text which was misleading users.

## Current Workflow (Already Correct)

### 1. Approval Engine Transitions
```typescript
// Dean can send to departments for clarification
{ from: RequestStatus.DEAN_REVIEW, to: RequestStatus.DEPARTMENT_CHECKS, requiredRole: UserRole.DEAN },

// Department responses go back to dean
{
  from: RequestStatus.DEPARTMENT_CHECKS,
  to: RequestStatus.DEAN_REVIEW,
  requiredRole: [UserRole.MMA, UserRole.HR, UserRole.AUDIT, UserRole.IT]
},
```

### 2. API Route Logic (Already Correct)
```typescript
case 'forward':
  // Handle department responses to Dean clarifications
  if ([UserRole.MMA, UserRole.HR, UserRole.AUDIT, UserRole.IT].includes(user.role as UserRole) && 
      requestRecord.status === RequestStatus.DEPARTMENT_CHECKS) {
    nextStatus = RequestStatus.DEAN_REVIEW;  // ✅ Correctly goes back to Dean
  }
```

## Fix Applied

### Updated ApprovalModal UI Text
**Before (Misleading):**
```typescript
<option value="forward">Approve & Send to Chief Director</option>
```

**After (Accurate):**
```typescript
{['mma', 'hr', 'audit', 'it'].includes(userRole || '') && currentStatus === 'department_checks' ? (
  <option value="forward">Respond to Dean</option>
) : (
  <option value="forward">Approve & Send to Chief Director</option>
)}
```

## Workflow Confirmation

### Dean Clarification Process:
1. **Dean sends clarification**: `DEAN_REVIEW` → `DEPARTMENT_CHECKS`
   - Dean selects target department (HR, MMA, Audit, IT)
   - Request status becomes `department_checks`

2. **Department responds**: `DEPARTMENT_CHECKS` → `DEAN_REVIEW`
   - Department user sees "Respond to Dean" option
   - When they click "forward", it goes back to Dean
   - Request status becomes `dean_review` again

3. **Dean reviews response**: `DEAN_REVIEW` → `CHIEF_DIRECTOR_APPROVAL`
   - Dean can now approve and send to Chief Director
   - Or request additional clarification if needed

## Benefits

1. **Correct UI Text**: Department users see "Respond to Dean" instead of misleading text
2. **Clear Workflow**: Users understand where their response is going
3. **Proper Flow**: Maintains the correct Dean → Department → Dean → Chief Director flow
4. **No Logic Changes**: The underlying workflow was already correct

## Verification

### For Department Users (HR, MMA, Audit, IT):
- When status is `department_checks`, they see "Respond to Dean" option
- Clicking this sends the request back to `dean_review` status
- Dean receives the response in their pending approvals

### For Other Users:
- Still see "Approve & Send to Chief Director" for normal workflow
- No change in their user experience

## Status: ✅ FIXED

The department response workflow was already functioning correctly. Only the UI text was misleading and has now been fixed to accurately reflect that department responses go back to the Dean.

Commit message:

Replace clarifications with queries throughout the project
- Renamed clarifications directory to queries
- Updated all component names (ClarificationModal -> QueryModal, etc.)
- Updated all status values (clarification_required -> query_required, etc.)
- Updated all property names and function names
- Updated navigation and display text
- Updated file upload paths and directories
- Systematic replacement of clarification terminology with query terminology

docs/fix-department-response-to-dean.md, after:

# Fix Department Response to Dean Clarification

## Issue Clarification
When Dean sends requests for query to departments (HR, MMA, Audit, IT), after the department responds, it should be sent back to the Dean, not to the Chief Director.

## Investigation Results
The workflow logic was already correct in both the approval engine and API route. The issue was only in the UI text which was misleading users.

## Current Workflow (Already Correct)

### 1. Approval Engine Transitions
```typescript
// Dean can send to departments for query
{ from: RequestStatus.DEAN_REVIEW, to: RequestStatus.DEPARTMENT_CHECKS, requiredRole: UserRole.DEAN },

// Department responses go back to dean
{
  from: RequestStatus.DEPARTMENT_CHECKS,
  to: RequestStatus.DEAN_REVIEW,
  requiredRole: [UserRole.MMA, UserRole.HR, UserRole.AUDIT, UserRole.IT]
},
```

### 2. API Route Logic (Already Correct)
```typescript
case 'forward':
  // Handle department responses to Dean queries
  if ([UserRole.MMA, UserRole.HR, UserRole.AUDIT, UserRole.IT].includes(user.role as UserRole) && 
      requestRecord.status === RequestStatus.DEPARTMENT_CHECKS) {
    nextStatus = RequestStatus.DEAN_REVIEW;  // ✅ Correctly goes back to Dean
  }
```

## Fix Applied

### Updated ApprovalModal UI Text
**Before (Misleading):**
```typescript
<option value="forward">Approve & Send to Chief Director</option>
```

**After (Accurate):**
```typescript
{['mma', 'hr', 'audit', 'it'].includes(userRole || '') && currentStatus === 'department_checks' ? (
  <option value="forward">Respond to Dean</option>
) : (
  <option value="forward">Approve & Send to Chief Director</option>
)}
```

## Workflow Confirmation

### Dean Clarification Process:
1. **Dean sends query**: `DEAN_REVIEW` → `DEPARTMENT_CHECKS`
   - Dean selects target department (HR, MMA, Audit, IT)
   - Request status becomes `department_checks`

2. **Department responds**: `DEPARTMENT_CHECKS` → `DEAN_REVIEW`
   - Department user sees "Respond to Dean" option
   - When they click "forward", it goes back to Dean
   - Request status becomes `dean_review` again

3. **Dean reviews response**: `DEAN_REVIEW` → `CHIEF_DIRECTOR_APPROVAL`
   - Dean can now approve and send to Chief Director
   - Or request additional query if needed

## Benefits

1. **Correct UI Text**: Department users see "Respond to Dean" instead of misleading text
2. **Clear Workflow**: Users understand where their response is going
3. **Proper Flow**: Maintains the correct Dean → Department → Dean → Chief Director flow
4. **No Logic Changes**: The underlying workflow was already correct

## Verification

### For Department Users (HR, MMA, Audit, IT):
- When status is `department_checks`, they see "Respond to Dean" option
- Clicking this sends the request back to `dean_review` status
- Dean receives the response in their pending approvals

### For Other Users:
- Still see "Approve & Send to Chief Director" for normal workflow
- No change in their user experience

## Status: ✅ FIXED

The department response workflow was already functioning correctly. Only the UI text was misleading and has now been fixed to accurately reflect that department responses go back to the Dean.
